# A guide for funding open source - very WIP

# Introduction

The goal of this document is to help open source maintainers fund their project. It includes explanations of some marketing concepts, a list of case studies of open source projects that successfully achieved funding , useful websites for funding and other learning resources.

Keep in mind i am just some dude on the internet and have no formal training on the subject, Feel free to open an issue If you found a mistake or have feedback or a suggestion.

Positive feedback could also be useful, It could help validate that what i am doing is useful (And therefore motivate and help me to decide to prioritize working on this), Maybe i could set up a "testimonies" that will persuade people to read this stuff and give it a try, So if you read something and got good results from implementing it please post about it [here](https://github.com/wiki-me/open_source_funding_guide/issues/2).

# marketing basics

[conversion
rate](https://www.optimizely.com/optimization-glossary/conversion-rate/)

[heat
maps](https://onlygrowth.com/blogs/posts/how-to-use-heat-maps-and-eye-tracking-software-to-improve-ux-and-lift-conversion-rates)

how attention is measured using heat maps, and how to direct attention
to improve conversion rate.

[attention
span](https://www.towermarketing.net/blog/winning-the-fight-against-a-website-users-attention-span/)

basically how much time people pay attention to something, for web pages
it is reported to be 8 seconds (so it is best to try to make them
count).

for video it can be longer, so using videos can be a good way to show
the attractive qualities of a project.

[Expectancy-value Theory of
motivation](https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/expectancy-value-theory/)

[Halo effect](https://cxl.com/blog/halo-effect/)

[Social proof](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_proof)

[Risk
aversion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk_aversion_(psychology))

[fear
appeals](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/emotional-nourishment/201809/fear-appeals)
(fear based marketing)

[product-market fit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product/market_fit)

[The reward system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reward_system)

A system in the brain in charge of handling rewards, rewards can be
\"Primary rewards\" (which include things that are good for our or our
offspring survival, stuff like food or parental involvement).
\"Extrinsic rewards\" (like money or the good results of using a certain
feature of some software) are conditioned rewards and their ability to
motivates comes from being associated with Primary rewards (and can even
become pleasurable).

Reward anticipation is
[linked](https://liveinnovation.org/dopamine-more-than-pleasure-the-secret-is-the-anticipation-of-a-reward/)
to \"wanting\" and dopamine and is used in marketing.

# case studies

[KDE](https://pointieststick.com/2024/12/02/i-think-the-donation-notification-works/)

Similar to thunderbird, in app notifactions appeared asking for donations ([see details](https://pointieststick.com/2024/08/28/asking-for-donations-in-plasma/) .this made donating more discoverable and improved the conversion rate). and it seemed to work well because KDE recieved in a single day what it recieved in the prior two months (and that data includes only paypal),



[linux mint](https://linuxmint.com/)

[godot engine](https://godotengine.org/)

[ruby together](https://rubytogether.org/)

[python software foundation](https://www.python.org/psf/)

[OpenStreetMap
Foundation](https://wiki.osmfoundation.org/wiki/Main_Page)

[r-consortium](https://www.r-consortium.org/about)

[blender development fund](https://fund.blender.org/)

[slackware linux](https://www.patreon.com/slackwarelinux)

[Thunderbird](https://groups.google.com/g/tb-planning/c/-jbmYvYdX1g)

thunderbird got 15 people hired in 2020, [in 2022](https://blog.thunderbird.net/2023/05/thunderbird-is-thriving-our-2022-financial-report/) revenue was about 6M (more then double the previous year), they explained the growth by saing:  

>Before we discuss that, you might be wondering what we did differently to generate such a significant surge of support last year. 

>At the end of 2021, we decided to make a bigger investment in communicating with you. That meant more frequent blog posts and newsletters, daily engagement across our social media channels, and expanding the number of places we interact with you (like our relatively new Mastodon account). 

>We also attribute this amazing uplift to the release of Thunderbird 102, as well as a first-of-its-kind, in-app donation appeal at the end of year. 

>In short, we learned that projects like ours can benefit greatly from simply asking for donations, while simultaneously explaining how those donations will benefit the project – and ultimately, how they will benefit you. So let’s talk about that! 



[krita](https://krita.org/en/item/the-inside-view-how-krita-is-developed/)

(krita is funding two people using steam income)

[Ardour](https://community.ardour.org/download)

basically you pay for downloaing the binary , a \"subscription\" of 1\$
dollar a month can get all updates (as long as you are subscribed).

[reported](https://discourse.ardour.org/) a income of about
US\$12922.00/month (on march 2021).

[Vue.js](https://www.patreon.com/evanyou) (says how much \"impressions\"
meaning basically how many people view something on stuff like the
repository or the homepage )

[How React Flow became a financially sustainable open source library](https://reactflow.dev/blog/asking-for-money-for-open-source/)

[How JHipster’s Bounty System saved the project](https://blog.opencollective.com/jhipsters-bounty-system-and-how-it-saved-the-project/)

Sponsers [get]([url](https://www.jhipster.tech/sponsors/)) a specific number of bounties per month depending on how much they give, by the end of the month the bounty is gone.

[mariadb](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MariaDB)

Mariab db uses the [business source license](https://mariadb.com/bsl-faq-mariadb/) for some components which converts to a open source license after a while but until then has additional restrictions , for example [less then three server instances in production](https://mariadb.com/projects-using-bsl-11/)

# websites:

[Liberapay](https://liberapay.com/)

[Polar](https://polar.sh/)

[rysolv](https://www.rysolv.com/)

[onlysponsors](https://onlysponsors.dev/)

[Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/)

[Mitra](https://codeberg.org/silverpill/mitra) - a open source microblogging service that is a part of the fediverse, and has an option to subscribe to exclusive content.

[thank.dev](https://thanks.dev/), [stackaid](https://www.stackaid.us/) and [ecosyste.ms funds](https://funds.ecosyste.ms/) - software that automatically distribute funds.

# learning resources:

[10 years of Dear ImGui](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/issues/7892)

[I’m now a full-time professional open source maintainer](https://words.filippo.io/full-time-maintainer/) and [Maintaining Go as a day job - a year later
](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-2000-maintaining-go-as-a-day-job-a-year-later/)

Authors makes a income similar to the one he had at google, by offering retainers to companies that benefit from his work , and using the reputation he acquired as a open source maintainer to offer consulting. he argues you should learn how to sell.

[14 Rewards for Software Developers to Fund Independent
Projects](https://blog.patreon.com/rewards-software-developers)

[I Just Hit \$100k/yr On GitHub Sponsors!(How I Did
It)](https://calebporzio.com/i-just-hit-dollar-100000yr-on-github-sponsors-heres-how-i-did-it)

[lemonade stand](https://github.com/nayafia/lemonade-stand)

[Business models for open-source software
(wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_models_for_open-source_software)

[Open-source
economics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_economics)

[opencollective
case-studies](https://blog.opencollective.com/tag/case-studies/)

[ Roads and Bridges: The Unseen Labor Behind Our Digital Infrastructure
](https://www.fordfoundation.org/media/2976/roads-and-bridges-the-unseen-labor-behind-our-digital-infrastructure.pdf)

there are reviews and information on the [goodreads
page](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/32317627-roads-and-bridges)

[To make money in FOSS, build a business
first](https://drewdevault.com/2021/03/03/To-make-money-in-FOSS-build-a-business.html)

creator of sway and sourcehut on open source funding

[How does SourceHut's FOSS business model work?](https://sourcehut.org/blog/2022-01-09-how-does-our-business-work/)

[Why the GPL is great for
business](https://archive.fosdem.org/2020/schedule/event/gpl_and_business/)

talk by the Founder of nextcloud and owncloud.

[The Asymmetry of Open Source - A comprehensive guide to funding open source software projects](https://matt.life/writing/the-asymmetry-of-open-source)

Post by a full time OSS developer

